## utop

`utop` is the 

#quit

---

## Expressions

In functional programming (FP) the building blocks of any programs are expressions  
Expressions are like statements or commands in imperative programming languages.

## Values
A value is an expression that doesn't need any further evaluation.

**Integers**
```ml
1990;;
(* : int = 1990 *)

1990 + 35;;
(* : int = 2025 *)
```

**Booleans**
```ml
true;;
(* : bool = true *)

2025 > 1990;;
(* : bool = true *)
```

**Strings**
```ml
"hola";;
(* : string = "hola" *)

"hola" ^ " mundo!";;
(* : string = "hola mundo!" *)
```

**Floats**
```ml
1.0;;
(* : float = 1.0 *)

1.0 +. 4.0;;
(* : float = 5.0 *)
```

In Ocaml there are different types of operators for integers and floats, float operators has a point after a normal operator and operates only over floats, for example `2.5 *. 5` is not a valid expression be cause `5` is an integer, not a float.

---

## If Expressions

If expressions conditionally allows one expression over the other. In Ocaml if expressions always return a value and the else clause has always to be defined

```ml
if condition then branch else branch;;
(* : string = "Tu sei un vero italiano" *)
```
```ml
if "pineapple pizza" > "pizza margherita" then "Non sei italiano" else "Tu sei un vero italiano";;
(* : string = "Tu sei un vero italiano" *)
```

- **condition** expression should evaluate to boolean
- **then** branch and **else** branch has to have expressions of the same type
- **else** branch is always required


```ml
if 0 then "hola" else "mundo";;
(* Error because value 0 is not a boolean expression *)

if true then "hola" else 1;;
(* Error because "hola" and 1 have different types *)

if true then "hola";;
(* Error because else branch is not provided *)
```

---

## unit type

It's an especiall type that only has one possible value denoted by `()`. It's `void` equivalent in other programming lenguages but unlike `void`, `unit` is a valid type

```ml
let print_hello () = print_endline "Hello, world!";;
(* val print_hello : unit -> unit = <fun> *)
```

---

## `let` Definitions

Definitions let's us give a name to a value, it's equivalent to varibles in other languages but with the difference that definitions can't change.

Definitions are not expressions but syntactically contain expressions

```ml
let greet = "Ciao!";;
(* val greet : string = "Ciao!" *)
```

*Note:*  
Read the `utop` response from right to left, `"Ciao!"` is a `string` that is binded to a **definition** called `greet`.

*Note:*
- if you try to run `greet = "Hi!"` you will see `: bool = false`, this is because
1. `=` in Ocaml is the boolean comparison operator
2. you can't mutate a let definition, but you can re-define binding: `let greet = "Hi!"`, in which case you still didn't mutate the definition you re-created it

---

## `let` Expressions

Let expressions are subexpressions that allow you to bind values to names within a larger expression. The in keyword indicates that the preceding binding is a subexpression that can be used in subsequent expressions as a value.

This concept is similar to mathematical substitution, where you replace variables with their values:

```ml
let x = 7 in let y = 3 in x + y;;
(* : int = 10 *)

(*
* you can think of this as a kind of mathematical substitution:
*
* let x = 7
* let y = 3
*
* in: x + y
* is: 7 + 3
* resolves to: 10
*)
```

Note that `x` and `y` are only defined within the scope of the `x + y` expression. If you try to access `x` or `y` outside this scope, you will encounter an error:

```ml
x;;
(* Error: Unbound value x*)
```

Let expressions can be used with any type of expression, not just integers. For example:

```ml
let greet = "hello" in greet ^ " world!";;
(* val greet : string = "hello world!" *)
```

Actually you can consider *let definitions* as *let expressions* within the toplevel scope or the scope of the program, so every place where you use the binding of a let definition you are refering in essence to a substitution.

---

## Scope

It's where the binding name is meaningful, or, where you can substitute a binding by its value.

Let's visualize the previous example with new eyes:

```ml
let x = 7 in ( let y = 3 in ( x + y ));;
                             <- A -->
               <-------- B --------->
<---------------- C ---------------->
(* Where A is a subexpression of B, and B a subexpression of a bigger expression C *)
```

Here, `x` is meaningful in `B`, and not before. In the same way `y` is meaningfull in `A`, and not before.

*Note:*  
Let definitions follow a scoping rule where the most recent definition takes precedence:
```ml
let x = 10 in ( let x = 5 in ( x ) );;
(* : int = 5 *)
```

---

## Functions

### Anonymous Functions

Anonymous functions or lambda functions are functions defined without a name. They are particularly useful for short, one-off functions that are passed as arguments to higher-order functions (more of it later). In Ocaml they are defined by using the keyboard `fun`:

```ml
fun x -> x + 1990;;
(* : int -> int = <fun> *)
```

From right to left: this is a function that takes an `int` as input, and returns an `int` as output

**Function Application:**

In Ocaml it's not necessary to use parenthesis to pass arguments to a function:

```ml
(fun x -> x + 1990) 35;;
(* : int = 2025 *)
```

### Named Functions

In Ocaml anonymous functions are values, and as such you can give them a name:

```ml
let add_to_1990 = fun x -> x + 1990
(* val add_to_1990 : int -> int = <fun>  *)
```

Or its semantically equivalent (syntactic sugar):

```ml
let add_to_1990 x = x + 1990
(* val add_to_1990 : int -> int = <fun>  *)
```

Just pass the argument to the left, and eliminate the `fun` keyword and the arrow (`->`) operator.

*Note:*  
Actually let expressions are syntactic sugar of function applications:
```ml
(fun x -> x + 1990) 35;;
let x = 35 in x + 1990;;
(* both are equivalent *)
```